and just local quality of life, people in a particular
country, in Kazakhstan,
in the best energy, clean energy,
some health, health care, right -wing education, education
that decides.
That's all, that is, at the moment, which decides the
global situation of the planet, and at the same time
decides our today, that's why one of the tasks, is
a university in its own way,
which, today, as it is, to appear in such a
good trend, it is, of course, a work among the
countries.
That is, we have a big one, if we were
earlier proud of our connections with large universities, and they
are still there.
Well, we are now already developing on the work on
the concrete of our national economy,
on national universities.
So, I would say, why am I, and say, when
they offered me to support the energy university here, when
I was good enough, I immediately agreed to be good
enough, and became a director of university.
So,
well,
and on the other hand, the university is now much
more powerful.
I would like to say, it is a very interesting
playbook that we present, if you listen to it, and
if you want to start with your own voice, listen
to this playbook, one of the points of this playbook
is to be a magnet for a cool talent,
and then to get the rewards in order to be
able to afford it.
Maybe there are still some moments that are important to
participate in the creation of the voice.
How will they create, what are the recommendations of a
person?
A person who wants to create a new voice.
Well,
first of all, I will say that, in general, the
voice is more than needed in Kazakhstan.
Okay, first of all, it is good.
Yes, yes, yes.
Second,
if you look, I was trying to
enter academic processes
especially not to enter.
Why?
Because even after school I worked with students, well, individually,
but I have never read lectures.
Why, by the way?
Well, I can't read.
And also, I will always change.
And now we will talk about the same two hours
and you will think, I will talk about the same,
but other words maybe in another scenario and so
I have already repeatedly talked about how to study
parallel with work and do lectures and read something.
I explained it like this, but the last time we
talked with a new teacher,
Erhan Sadik, he also did not say, well, I will
say, well, I will say, well, I will say, well,
I promised that maybe in September,
or in May, or in January, or in October, or
in December, or in March or April,
or in September, or in October or April, or in
January, or in July,
I think it's better for the audience to write about
it.
Yes,
I've already done it like this.
That's why,
when I...
If I hadn't signed up as a scientist, I'd say,
I'm not a scientist.
I'm not, but it's still there.
It would be a great honor.
That's why it allowed me to pay attention to all
disciplines.
In addition to physics, I'd say, medicine, biology, all around
the world, I'd say, scientific research.
Otherwise, if you're a scientist, and you're starting to manage
something, then you'll definitely be moving in this kind of
research, like a scientist, you can't be objective for all
of your employees.
That's why it's a kind of a challenge that I
think I should be able to set up and consider
all this science, like physics and plasma.
By the way, Gilbert, he had an interesting approach
when he was supposed to accept it, and he came
up with an idea
every time new.
The topic was about the math, which he wants to
study himself.
Sometimes he has an interesting idea to go to the
arena and study with students together with a new sphere,
and then he has an interesting idea.
Otherwise, he doesn't want to tell you what he knows.
This is a good example.
I thought about it like this, to find such an
example, to be an elective, to be interested in it.
I use all the technologies that I've been using for
this time.
I use all of them on my own.
I have an experience that I have.
That's why it's in the center of my mind.
That's why I also look at what I'm looking at.
For example, even the quality of a good example, I
checked it.
I studied science at the university, which I like.
Astrophysic cosmology.
At some point, we met George Smut, at one of
the conferences.
We talked about it when he said he was talking
about it.
He was talking about the Nobel Prize,
the Nobel Prize,
the Nobel Prize, I was talking about it.
I know that this was a good example.
I understand that, but we had talked about it in
the new way.
Then we talked about it.
And from that moment, we started to create an energy
-cosmically laboratory.
The one that still works in the Zabai F1, it's
very unique.
I've already told you about it, it's very unique.
It's unique to say that we've got a lot of
huge resources.
We've got to present these researches that are interested in
the whole world.
This is what I'm going to tell you.
The Gama of Spleski, which is observed in the universe.
What is the interesting discovery of the phenomenon?
It was a launch of a satellite that was followed
by Americans.
At the moment they said that it would be a
matter of nuclear weapons.
It was a launch of a satellite that looked at
the gas with the fire.
On the ground.
To see if they were trying to control it.
I don't know what to say, but it's the coldest
time of the year.
This satellite was not working, I watched it, everything seemed
to have been talking about it.
There was no question, and suddenly, they had already taken
a photo of it.
And panic was starting, it was starting to develop, it
turned out that it was not on Earth, it came
from there.
And then they looked at the story, and there were
such cases.
And then, on the other hand, they had already been
working on the whole second task.
He began to look at the gamma -split, which comes
from the other side, that is, from the surface of
the Earth from there.
From the cosmos, it is such a powerful distribution of
energy, it happens during the interaction between, let's say, the
neutron star and the black star, or, for example, the
surface is formed.
At the first moment, the powerful gamma -split, the powerful
distribution of energy, then the light of the energy, the
light of the light,
and immediately got to the scientific interest, naturally, and began
to look at it, then began to look at the
things, after the light, in the visible light, the Earth
began to look at it.
And here is such an idea that we decided to
realize, because it was in the financial resources, it was
quite modest, and we created the laboratory at the University
of the University of Cosmos.
And we put a telescope here in the space of
the Earth together with the Earth.
The telescope is getting better.
Well, here is the space of the Earth, in the
space of the Earth,
on the platform that has the Institute of Astrophysics and
the University of the Universe, here, in the near future,
it is our partner.
And the telescope is, in a small way, only a
meter -long size,
but its peculiarity is that when we discussed how to
do it, we had to do it quickly, because the
gamma -split is going down literally for about 10 seconds.
Then it goes after the middle session, it can go
there, say, even hours, minutes, seconds, and even days.
It's just like, what happened with the mirror, and then
it goes up and down.
It was important, as soon as it opened, when the
satellite registers the gamma -split and gives the Earth a
signal, that there is a satellite in the sky,
and who, in this time,
no one has the opportunity, no one has the opportunity
to turn around, well, this can be a perfect source
of the telescope on Earth.
Turn around, and try to find this satellite.
And as soon as you find it, try to observe
the appearance.
And the telescope, in Kazakhstan,
today, it is a record, by the speed of the
turn of the target.
Because we have this telescope, it makes it standart, such
a piece of paper, which is covered with such a
diaphragm, as it is covered with.
And it makes it like, it pushes it, like a
telescope, it pushes it like this.
And this happens approximately for eight seconds.
Well, we start to observe
if it comes, if it comes, if it comes, if
it comes from the satellite, after 30 -40 seconds, we
start to see the light.
And after us, the next telescope, which is on Earth,
there are hundreds of seconds, that is, it still recognizes
that in this regard, with our telescope, there is a
group, which works,
with the employees, large groups, scientists in different countries.
Because, there are two of them.
This is the first one,
in which one day, one sees it, and so on.
We must exchange these data.
And the second one, the first seconds,
and there is a million of data at this time,
it takes time, from this time.
And of course, we share it with them.
We share it with them.
Let's just say, about the size of the audience.
Why does it have a scientific insight, and study our
results?
Well, you see,
just imagine yourself,
why I stayed interested in you, but only because I
saw it.
Well,
we, we are blind, we are moving around, we are
like, we are moving around.
And we have only a step,
I always thought it was interesting, but I didn't know
what it was.
I always love music, but it's an element of love.
Motivation is always an interest.
I don't understand other motivation.
I know more than today.
It motivates me, right?
That's why we learn it all the time.
Today, after the last research of the telescope that was
involved in the cosmos, there were doubts that there were
big bands and so on.
This model of the universe changes periodically,
and that's why we know what happens in the universe,
and how processes happen there.
These are the same physical processes that allow you to
understand the physics here.
This is purely scientific interest in how we are built
there.
That's why I think that this is the main task
of why we learn the cosmos.
Because we need to do nothing.
Yes.
You can remember three things.
Let's imagine that your grandchildren are asking you three very
bright memories for you from the age of 16 to
the University of Azerbaijan.
The bright ones?
Yes.
It's different.
You know, I'm such a person.
I don't have any other bright ones.
No.
I told Cosmic Laboratory.
Yes.
Great.
It's really...